[THEME MUSIC]
Hello, my beautiful
co-creators.
Lilou here for Gaiam TV.
Today I'm in Windsor.
I'm trying to figure
out where I am
now because I travel so much.
And today I'm with you, Jazz.
Thank you for accepting
this invitation.
It's a real honor.
A real pleasure.
So you have founded
something called
the Energy Diamond Coaching.
But you were born in Pakistan,
interestingly enough.
You have this whole
background in science,
and now you're-- we're going
to speak about consciousness
and the different
levels of consciousness
in this conversation.
Can you give us a little
bit of your background
and how you got to this place
to understand that there's
different levels
of consciousness
and we can actually tap in that
and work with that and better
your life-- better our lives
because we've understood that?
Yeah, I was originally
from a Muslim family.
And I was kind of asked to
read the Koran and memorize it.
And unfortunately,
nobody explained to me
what I was reading.
So I was reading
all this Arabic,
but I wasn't getting
any meaning from it.
So as I grew up, I
wanted to do things
which had more meaning to them.
And I naturally veered
towards science.
Science has, you know,
here is this formula,
here is this description, and
it's telling you the way things
actually are in the world.
So it was very meaningful
for me, and as a consequence,
I went on and
became a scientist.
But an interesting thing
happened when I was doing
my degree in astrophysics.
I studied quantum
physics and I actually
was doing a lot
of quantum physics
work as part of my degree.
I discovered something
really unusual,
which is that in
quantum physics,
many scientists are aware of
the key problem with it, which
is it appears that people's
thoughts and their feelings
can affect the physical
activity inside of a quantum
physics experiment.
So your mind can affect matter.
Your mind can affect reality.
And this is
something people have
been battling with
trying to understand
for the last century.
And they still haven't got to
grips with it, the possibility
that your thoughts could
somehow create reality.
And I started to look into what
many quantum physicists were
exploring on how
can we understand
the role of our thoughts
and feelings and perceptions
in creating reality.
And a lot of the
quantum physicists
would refer to Eastern
philosophies, things
like Buddhism and Indian
Vedic systems, for example,
and Taoism.
It seems that the
models they had
of how the universe worked that
came from direct perception
on their medications and so
on, it seemed, bizarrely,
even though these people had
never been near a particle
accelerator or a
microscope, they
seemed to have a remarkable grip
on what was going on at quantum
levels in the universe.
So a lot of them got
curious about Buddhism
and about Vedic
philosophy and Taoism.
And naturally, I
got interested too.
I thought, well, if that's where
you get to understand what's
going on here, then
maybe I need to go over
there and have a look at it.
And then a lot of the masters,
these yoga masters and tai
chi masters, qi gong masters,
they work with energy directly.
They call it different names.
In the Indian systems,
they call that prana.
In the Chinese system,
they call it chi.
In the Japanese system,
they call it ki.
But effectively, it's life
force of some kind or other.
And somehow consciousness,
our thoughts and feelings,
seems to be in a kind of
collaboration with it.
So the people who are
the masters in the East,
they work with
that collaboration.
They use meditation
to manage their energy
and their vitality,
especially in things like yoga
and tai chi and qi gong.
And I thought, hm,
I'm a physicist,
but I-- if I could
use my own body
as an instrument to do
some experimentation, that
would be really great.
So I actually went
and studied qi gong
and I trained in it to
professional levels,
and also in Chinese medicine.
I started treating
patients and even
training other instructors.
And I started to see
another side to energy.
There is a physics
side to energy, which
is all about the way
that energy is perceived
by particle physicists and
people like Einstein and people
like that.
But then there's this
other side to energy
which is very different to the
way people look at in the West.
And it's closely tied
to consciousness.
So it's like reality, the world
that we live in, in the East,
they look at it and say,
well, the reality that you're
experiencing is entirely
dependent on what state of mind
you're actually in.
That means that each of us
could be living completely
different realities based on the
kind of consciousness we're in.
Though some of us are
asleep, literally,
or at that level
of consciousness.
Some of us look like we're
awake from a distance,
but when you come up close,
you realize they're not--
that person isn't awake at all.
They're kind of
sleepwalking, you know?
And then there are people
who are the highest
levels of consciousness.
They are what we might
consider to be called awake.
And within that there's
different awakening--
Different degrees.
But what I found fascinating
was how many people came up
to me when I first started
discussing this and saying,
well, OK, that's
a nice philosophy.
But how do we work
with this practically?
How do we move from being
asleep to perhaps being awake?
And how do we know which
of those things we are at,
you know, in our lives?
What parts of our lives are
asleep, which bits are awake,
and what parts are we
sleepwalking through?
And actually, that is
the way to look at it.
You can't look at a person
say that person is awake
or that person's asleep or
that person is sleepwalking.
We're actually a
mixture of those things.
Our lives are a mixture
of those things.
Some parts of our
lives are very awake.
Other parts we're
totally asleep in.
And there are some where
we think we're awake,
but actually we're sleepwalking
our way through life.
And if an incident or something
happens, boom, all of a sudden
we go back into the
non-awakening state.
Well, you get some people
who actually have woken up,
but they don't like it.
It's uncomfortable for
them to deal with reality
as it really is.
You know what they do?
They actually
choose intentionally
to go back to sleep.
They go back to sleep.
But there's a difference between
people who've woken up and gone
back to sleep and people
who've never woken up
and are still asleep.
Yes, because often we
say you can't go back.
When you-- once you're asleep,
you awaken, you're awake
and it's impossible to live
the life you used to live.
Well, anybody who's
seen the film "Matrix"
will recognize a
character in there
who didn't like
the world the way
it was and he kind
of betrayed all
the other people in the movie.
And he decided he just wanted to
be reimplanted back in reality
as a rich person, and
he wanted to forget
how reality really was.
He didn't like it.
He just wanted to-- he
preferred the illusion.
The big steak.
He wanted his meat.
He liked his steak and he
wanted to be reasonably rich.
And he didn't care if
it was an illusion.
To him, it felt better
than the reality.
So you do get people who-- they
just don't have the capacity
to deal with the truth.
It's as simple as that.
They don't have the capacity.
So if you're going
to go to a place
where you are going
to get woken up
or you're going to
wake yourself up,
you've got to go in with a
caveat, a kind of warning,
which is, you've got to have the
capacity to deal with the truth
that you're going to see, that
you're going to experience.
If you don't have the
capacity to deal with it,
you're going to go
into a state of shock.
You're going to go into
such a level of pain
that you feel permanently
disabled for the rest
of your life.
But don't you think that if we
are facing that type of truth,
then everything being
perfectly in order,
there is actually the right
moment for us to experience it,
even how bad it can be?
Like from-- in your own
personal experience,
maybe that's a
good time to share
with us what you went through.
Yeah, and I discovered
something when, a few years
ago, I end up homeless.
There were obviously
some truths in my life
I wasn't facing up to,
otherwise I wouldn't
have ended up homeless.
And I discovered something
which I kind of expanded
upon a scene I saw in a movie.
I love movies.
They're full of little
clues with regards
to what you've really
got on in your life.
That's good, because
you know, Gaiam TV
has so many movies on
there, and people just like
go from one movie to the next.
So you're speaking to the
right-- don't we love movie?
Oh my goodness, we love
spiritual connected movie.
Yes.
OK, well there's an unusual
movie which is with Clive Owen.
And he played in movie
called "The International."
In "The International"
he plays a CIA agent
who finds that there are
these very naughty bankers who
are processing funds for arms.
And Clive Owen is determined
to expose these bankers
for what they're doing.
And he kidnaps the head
of one of the banks
and takes him to his base
and he starts to tell him
that he's going to tell
the world the truth
about what they've been up to.
But the banker is pretty smart.
And the banker says, look,
before you tell people
the real truth, you have
to tell them the truth
that they want to hear.
And then you're going to
have to tell them the truth
that they want to believe.
And only after
that are they even
going to begin to think about
entertaining the real truth.
And I thought about
that, you know.
I thought, he's right.
I can go to any person
typically in the street,
and if I just give
them the real truth,
whatever it is, they probably
wouldn't be able to handle it,
you know?
So I thought--
They would think
you were crazy.
Yeah, they'd think I'm crazy.
And I'm like, where
am I coming from?
And, you know,
that's not the way
the world is, kind of thing.
And I thought about
it, I thought, hm.
So eventually I came
up with a realization
that before you
can connect people
to the real truth
about themselves
and really connect them
into what they really
need to be woken
up to, they need
to go to kind of gradual stages
of getting there, to the truth.
And the first stage is
you have to work with what
people are willing to hear.
If you're trying to tell
them that the earth is round
but that's not what
they're ready to hear,
as far they're concerned,
they look around
and everything's flat,
all right, they're not
going to believe you, you know?
So the first thing
you've got to do
is, you've got to
communicate with people
in their own language,
in the perspectives
that they're used to and that
are within their experience.
So you talk to them
only the truths
that they're already
familiar with,
that they are prepared to hear.
And once they know that you are
someone who understands truths
the way they do, they'll
probably trust you enough
for you to ask them to consider
other things, things that might
even challenge their beliefs.
And that's the next
level of truth.
Once you tell people
what they want to hear,
then they're
probably going to be
ready to be told things which
might shift their beliefs.
The truth that they're
prepared to believe in
is about to be shifted.
And there's a stage where you
get to where people do start
to change their beliefs,
but you must have told them
already what they're
prepared to here
before you even get to there.
Now, there are a couple of
stages which follow that.
Once you've told someone
what they want to hear
and you've told them what
they need to in order for them
to begin to shift
their beliefs--
and that's nowhere
near the beginning,
because they still haven't
changed what they're doing.
They still haven't changed
the way they're acting.
So then, once you've
worked with them--
They start to
question at that stage.
Yeah, the beliefs.
If they're shifting
their beliefs,
they're probably
questioning what's going on,
and they're wondering whether
what they're doing or acting on
is the right thing.
That's usually when
they begin to start
working with the truth that
changes the way that they act.
OK, so there's the truth
that they want to hear,
the truth they want to
believe, then there's the truth
that they want to-- are prepared
to actually act on and change
their actions around.
And I thought, oh, that's
got to be it, that's got
to be end of it, right?
But I realized, no, there's
another layer of truth
beyond that, which is, you
can change the way people act,
but it doesn't mean that you're
going to change who they are.
People can pretend
to do stuff, but deep
down inside of themselves,
they're still the same people.
They've not changed
who they're being.
So beyond the truth which
shifts people's beliefs
is the truth that
shifts who they're
being, who they actually are.
So there's all
these layers so far.
You have to tell people
what they want to hear,
you have to tell people
what they want to believe,
you tell people what they're
going to do in order for them
to change the way the act,
and then, if you're lucky,
you'll get to the place where
you finally get to change
who they actually are.
And I thought, this has surely
got to be the end of it, right?
This is the final
truth that you're
going to be working with.
And I realized, no, of
course it isn't, because
beyond who we are and
what we think we are
and what we know
is everything else.
All the stuff that
we don't know.
What we don't
know, we don't know.
Yeah, exactly.
So there's a truth beyond
what we're prepared to be.
And that truth, if you'd
like, is the ultimate truth,
because it's beyond their ego.
It's beyond our awareness.
It's beyond what we
think of the world
and our models of the world.
It's what exists independently,
whether we are living
or whether we're dead.
So it turns out there's five
layers of truth, five levels
of truth you have to
work with people in order
for them to become fully
awake, if you like.
If you're asleep,
then you're probably
just listening to things
that you're prepared to hear.
You're not even listen to
things that change your beliefs,
let alone change the way
you act or who you're being.
If you are sleepwalking,
then you're
prepared to at least entertain
some things that people say
and maybe even change your
beliefs to some degree,
but you're not going to
change the way you act.
You're not going to
change who you are.
And lastly, if you
get to the point
where you are awake,
what you're hearing
isn't what you're going
to base your truth on.
What you believe isn't going to
be what you base your truth on.
How you act, how someone acts,
you're not going to judge
a person by the way they act.
Even who you are, deep down in
terms of the authentic being,
isn't something that you can
use to gauge how well someone's
connected to the real truth,
because people who are awake
know that there's even
a level beyond that.
So people who are
really awake, they
can look beyond how people are.
They can look over time.
They can look at the long
journey, if you like,
and they can see that there
might be an ultimate purpose
which can't be seen right now in
this present moment, that might
make this person
look bad right now,
but in the long
sort of journey you
might see that they're
actually doing some good,
but nobody gets the
fact that they are.
So the people who are
awake have some very
interesting kind of behaviors.
So I just wanted to
share just two or three
things about people who are
asleep, people who are awake,
and people are asleep--
how to spot them,
how to spot which
of those you are
and maybe which
parts of your life
are asleep or awake
or sleepwalking.
If you can come slightly
closer, because otherwise
I'm going to have this
mike little issue.
And also I would love to hear
how it is, this is related,
also I love this parallel
with your own life.
Because you went
through it big time.
So at what stage, because you--
I guess we hear it, hear it,
hear it until we're
really down and suffering
in this total turmoil to
eventually decide to change,
but unfortunately it's not
as easy as just hearing it.
No, part of my life is there
were parts-- there were times
in my life where I wasn't
prepared to even hear
and things, let alone shift
my beliefs, the way I acted.
So I was below asleep.
I was totally in
a coma in my life.
And then certain truths hit
me, sometimes in painful ways,
and you discover that if you
don't change what you believe,
you're never really going to
act in an appropriate way which
serves you.
And many of my
relationships, the kind
of works that I've done, and
the lessons I've learned,
they're all about
what level of truth
do you have the capacity
to work with, you know?
So one of the things
that I discovered
was that you need to know
which state you're in.
And you might find one part
of your life is asleep,
another part is
awake, and so on.
But you need to get at
least a map of your life
and which bits are awake
and which ones are not.
And you need a way of measuring
whether you're awake or not.
How do you know whether you're
awake or whether you're asleep?
Can we even measure it?
Yeah, how do you
identify whether some part
of your life or a person that
you know is asleep or a wake.
And there are
symptoms, you know?
There are signs which tell
you that person's asleep
or that part of
my life is asleep.
That person is awake or that
part of my life is awake.
Things that we can
spot immediately,
like having conversation?
Like what?
For example, people
who are asleep--
have you ever tried to talk
to someone who's asleep?
You can't, right?
Because they're in
their own little world.
They don't even probably know
that they're asleep, right?
And you won't get
a two way dialogue.
It's like you don't-- I
mean, sometimes I don't even
hear what they're saying.
It's a different
resonance, yeah.
Yeah, they won't hear you.
It might go in, but you
don't get a response
from them of the kind
that's linked to what you
were actually talking about.
You've probably had
conversations with people
where you're talking
with them, but they
seem to be having a
completely different
conversation from you.
They just don't
seem to be tuned in
or present to where you're at.
So that's often a symptom,
that someone who's asleep
will often be having their
own little dialogue going on
and they're not really present
to where you're coming from
and what you're
trying to communicate.
Another thing about
people who are asleep
is often-- you probably heard
stories like this from maybe
your friends, or I know
there've been occasions
where I've even done it myself.
Someone who's asleep, let's
imagine there's a sleepwalker
who walks all over them.
Now, the sleepwalker
doesn't even
know the person who's
asleep is underneath them,
and they've walked
all over them.
Now, here's what's
going to happen.
The person who's asleep, they
don't know that they're asleep,
and they certainly don't
know that there are people
in the world like
sleepwalkers or people
who are awake,
because they don't
see anything beyond their
own little inner world.
So if they wake up one day and
they've been hurt and somewhere
in their life,
sleepwalkers walked
over them and kicked
them and hurt them,
they're going to wake up.
And because they don't know
about the existence of anybody
else, the person who's asleep
is going to look at their pain,
they're going to look
at their suffering,
and they're going to go, well,
must be my fault. I caused it.
It's my own issue.
And they'll never
blame anybody else.
No matter how hard
someone else hurts them,
they will not
blame anybody else,
or they will not
have the awareness
to know that that pain was
caused by somebody else.
It wasn't self-inflicted.
But they'll fool themselves
into thinking that they did it
themselves, that
they're unworthy,
they're not that
together, they're clumsy,
or they just don't know
how to handle themselves.
So they'll blame themselves.
So that's another symptom of
seeing people who are asleep.
Other people hurt them,
but they blame themselves.
So if you are doing that, if
you're beating yourself up
over something which-- and
you're looking at the pain
you're experiencing
and you're wondering
how on earth you did
that to yourself, it
might be that you never did.
It might be somebody
else did, and you
were completely
blind to the fact
that they were hurting you.
So these are the are the two
really key symptoms that you
see of people who are asleep.
We can definitely
see how we can,
for example, here can apply
in relationships, and maybe
not at work.
Or in relationships, but not
in communications or in--
Well, there's another feature
about people who are asleep.
I'll just finish with this
one for people who are asleep.
Now, imagine you're asleep, OK?
And the house is burning down
around you that you're in.
And a fireman bursts through
the doors of the house,
comes into your bedroom
and violently picks you up
off the bed and wakes
you up in the process,
and then begins to take
you down the stairs
to a place of safety.
Now, you're asleep.
And suddenly, violently,
you're woken up
and some strange
person is manhandling
you and taking you
out while there's
fire burning around you.
What are you going to do?
Are you going to
go, oh, thank you?
No.
You're probably going
to start screaming
and start hitting them, thinking
that you're being kidnapped
or something like that.
And it isn't until you're out in
the garden, where you're safe,
and you begin to look
back at your house
and see it's all burning
down, that you realize
this person just saved you.
All right?
So a symptom that you'll
often see is, people who come
and rescue people who
are asleep and are
in emergency situations,
the person who's asleep
will always attack them.
They'll always beat them up.
They'll always hurt the
person who's rescuing them.
Do you know any
people like that?
People who are being helped in
an emergency situation and they
don't even know that
they're being helped,
and they bite the
hand the feeds them?
They literally fight
them and beat them up.
And often we reply,
I'm here to help you.
I'm not here against you.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So this is probably
the most stark
example of someone
who's demonstrating
a symptom of being asleep.
They're being rescued
by someone who
really wants to make
sure they're OK,
but they just don't see it.
They think they're
actually being hurt.
Typically what you see
is that they get taken
out of a place of comfort.
They were nice and
comfortable in their bed
and they've been
taken out of it.
When a person who's
asleep is taken out
of a comfort zone in their life
for the sake of their safety
and to actually ensure that they
are going to survive and not
die in that comfort zone,
often that individual
will kick off and
start beating up
the person who's trying to take
them out that comfort zone.
They do not like being taken
out of their comfort zone.
That's what they're used to.
Addicts are examples
of people are that.
You try and take someone who's
an addict away from their drugs
and, you know, the person who's
trying to help that individual
is clearly trying to get
them away from those drugs.
But the person who's got
the drugs and is an addict,
he won't look at it that way.
He'll think you're
taking away something
that's vital for his survival.
And he will kick,
he will scream,
they even do things like rob and
kill just so they can sustain
being in that comfort zone.
They do that.
And that exists too
for soft addictions.
Some people are addicted to
shopping or internet or what
have you, and we-- it can
unleash the worst of ourselves
when we're confronted and
when somebody takes that away.
Well, that's an
example of someone
who's kind of half asleep.
Because they're kind of
sleepwalking, if you like.
And here's the thing
about sleepwalkers.
Sleepwalkers, from a distance,
you can imagine seeing them
in a room and they're
making themselves a cup
of tea or whatever, all right?
And you walk into the room
and you see them doing this.
If you see someone like
that in a room doing
that kind of thing,
you clearly would not
think that they were asleep.
You would think, well,
that person must be awake.
They're making
themselves a cup of tea.
So you walk over to them
thinking that they're awake--
Where is this going?
And you try to have a
conversation with them
and they won't respond to you.
They keep making their cup
of tea, wandering around,
and they somehow, they
can't see your presence.
They can't even see
that you're there.
And it's quite strange,
because from a distance,
they look like they're awake,
but then when you get up close
to them and you try and have
a conversation or a dialogue
or try make a connection,
it just doesn't happen.
And you probably are aware
of people, when you first
met them, you thought, wow,
this person's really bright,
they're really awake,
they're really tuned in.
And then, as you
get to know them,
you realize it was all a
pretty superficial thing
and that deep down
within themselves, they
aren't awake at all.
They're completely
blind to what's
going on in their lives and
it's kind of a facade, almost.
And often they're the
kind of people, again,
there are symptoms to
spot people like that.
So one of the symptoms is often
they'll hurt people and not
even know they're doing it.
It's only when they wake
up and someone tells them,
did you realize you were
hurting that person?
And the person usually goes,
I had no idea I had no idea
I was hurting that person.
And this is what you'll see.
Someone who's
sleepwalking, for example,
will very casually walk
over somebody who's asleep,
for example, and hurt them.
And while they're doing it,
because they're sleepwalking,
they won't even know that
that person was there.
They won't even
know that they hurt
them through their actions.
And it's only when they
wake up, truly wake up,
and someone who's awake
says, that person over there,
do you realize you
walked all over them?
That you took advantage of
them, that you hurt them?
And the person who was
sleepwalking and is now awake
will go, I had no idea.
I'd no idea I'd hurt them.
And if I was-- if I'd known,
I wouldn't have done that.
So often people who
are sleepwalkers only
discover that they've hurt
people when they've woken up
because some dramatic event
has happened in their lives
or someone who's
genuinely awake and wise
draws their attention
to something.
And they get to see that
they've hurt someone
and they didn't even know
that they've been doing it.
So hurting other people without
knowing that you're doing it
is often a symptom of
someone who's sleepwalking.
There are a couple of other
symptoms, and one of the ones
is that someone
who's sleepwalking,
like the person
who's asleep, there's
an issue with eye contact.
Someone who's
sleepwalking, they will
be living in their own world.
You can stare at them
straight in the face
and they won't see you there,
and they'll carry on doing
things that they were doing.
So you might have a direct
connection with this person,
right, and you
think that you had
a direct connection
with that person,
but somehow it was
all an illusion.
They were never really there.
You can see in the eyes, no?
Literally, you can
see it in the eyes.
You thought--
A bit scary for an
awakened person to see that.
Yeah, because you thought
from a distance that person
was awake, so you're
looking forward
to going over, having
a conversation,
and doing things with them.
And then when you get
there, you find you
can't do anything with them.
They're on their
own little mission.
They're not even aware of your
presence, your true presence,
where you're really from.
So sleepwalkers do
have these symptoms.
But the most amazing thing,
the most amazing thing
is people who are awake.
People who are
awake-- imagine seeing
someone who's awake in a room.
If they see you across the
room-- one of the things
that people typically will do is
they'll acknowledge you, right?
They'll at least maintain
eye contact with you,
and that's a kind
of acknowledgement.
They recognize that
you exist and they
spotted you in the room, right?
So maintaining eye contact
is one of the things
that people who are
awake actually do.
It's not absolute thing,
but it's a thing that people
who are awake actually do.
Now, the other thing
that someone who's awake
actually does is someone who's
awake can see who's asleep
and they can see
who's sleepwalking.
Once they get up close enough,
they can see that that person's
sleepwalking.
The other thing that a
person who's awake can do
is that they can make plans
with other people who are awake.
A person who's awake
can't make plans
with someone who's asleep.
They can sit there by the
bed and go through all
these options, and
the person is not
going to be able to contribute
at all to making those plans.
And a sleepwalker isn't going
to be able to contribute
to making your plans either.
The only person you make plans
with or some kind of goal
that you want to commonly
achieve between--
Big plans.
Yeah, big plans.
The people who are awake.
You can only make big
plans, in other words,
with people who are awake.
It's safer, too, probably.
Well, what you'll find is
that people who are awake,
they'll end up in a two-way
conversation with you.
It's not a one-way conversation.
You talk to someone who's
asleep or a sleepwalker,
you're the one who's
doing all the talking.
And the other person, they're
either not responding at all
or they're just
going about doing
stuff as if you're not there.
A person who's awake
will listen to you
and will feed back things
to you based on the things
that you've been saying.
And maybe between
yourselves, you
can come up with a plan to help
the sleepwalkers to stop them
from waling all
over the sleepers.
Maybe you can do something which
ensures that the people who are
asleep don't roll off
the edge of a cliff
in the middle of their sleep.
So the people who are awake,
they can do all these things.
But the thing I love about
the people who are awake
is that if they're
strong enough, then
they can be there for the
sleepwalkers and the people who
are asleep when they wake up.
If you imagine
you've been asleep
and you're just beginning to
wake up and rubbing your eyes
and stretching open, looking
at the world around you,
and thinking, where
am I, kind of thing,
it's great to have someone
who's awake there by your side
when you wake up.
Because they can tell you,
oh, by the way, those things
down there, they're your legs.
You're going to need those
to get around this world.
And if you want to
get rid of stuff
that you don't need any more,
you want to dump garbage
from your past, baggage, there's
a spiritual toilet over there,
OK?
That's where you go
and let go of stuff
that you don't need any more.
There's a kitchen
over there where
you can go nurture yourself.
And those people over
there, don't disturb them.
They are in a deep
state of meditation
and they're trying to awaken
to an even higher level.
Have you come across
people who, people have
told you this
person's really awake,
they're kind of enlightened?
Yet when you go and approach
them, they kind of reject you,
they tell you, no, don't
talk to me, go away.
Have you ever come
across people like that?
I've met a lot of
spiritual egos, yeah.
Some people that they
were, but talking to them,
and actually then I decide not
to post those videos online,
because it doesn't
feel right, yeah.
Well, there are certain
individuals who actually are
very awake, but they're
trying to do a service for all
the people who are awake.
They're doing a higher service.
And a lot of the
people who are awake
will tell you, don't
interfere with that person.
They're doing something
to enable us to even wake
up to an even higher level.
And that means they can't
afford to spend time doing
trivial things like
just helping you gab it,
you know, in terms
of wakefulness.
And compassionately,
those individuals,
when you approach
them and you see
what a great source
of light they are,
compassionately, they
will indicate to you
they're not
available to help you
and you need to find
somebody else who's awake
and who isn't committed to
such a task as they are.
And I've come across
people like that.
I've come across
people who everybody
else said, oh, that's the
person you should go to.
And I've gone there
and I found that they
weren't as accommodating
as I thought they would be.
And in the end I realized, oh,
that person was someone who
used to help
people, but his role
has changed now in this world.
He's now dealing with
higher duties, if you like.
Therefore he's not someone
I should be bothering,
you know, out of respect.
You should leave them alone
because they're dealing
with a big-- bigger things.
But often we misplace that.
Because I hear so
often, I receive a lot
of feedbacks from the internet.
And often people say oh, this
person used to be available
but is not any more, and
he's just a different person.
He has changed.
It's not anymore that
leader, that person
that I used to know.
It's immediately we
feel then the separation
when it's not personal.
No, it's not personal.
It's just they've got
a bigger duty than us.
Now, you do get people
who are egotistical,
who used to help people.
But because they failed
to honor themselves
in the process of
helping others,
they ran themselves down and
they're not in a position,
energetically, to
have the capacity
to help anybody else any more.
So when people come to
them because they've
heard all these tales
about this person
and then that
particular master just
shoves them away and pushes them
away, people don't understand.
You're supposed to
be a master, you're
supposed to be a guru,
dut dah duh duh duh duh.
Yet you're rejecting me,
you're being horrible to me,
dah duh dah duh dah.
And it's because
that person was never
a master in the first place.
They put themselves out
as someone who could help.
Other people, maybe, made
that person into a master,
and it was a role
they never wanted.
They just had a gift.
They chose to share
it with people.
Too many people
demanded it from them
and they didn't-- he didn't
have enough left for himself.
And as a consequence
he ran himself down,
and the next thing you know,
he isn't available for anybody
any more.
Now I had someone
who was a mas--
I worked for who was like that.
But there's also some people
that think they have it or they
think they're-- and they don't.
I mean, there's also
disillusion within this realm.
I met quite a lot of people like
that in Europe, not in the US,
but in Europe,
interestingly enough.
So how to deal with
those situations
when you really have to
listen also deeply inside
for your own guidance
and not be lured
by what a seemingly
outside guru can give you?
These are very-- to me, these
are very, very important
questions right
now, because we are
sometimes following the wrong
people, and this-- yeah.
So I would love to
have your take on that,
within-- it's a little
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
within the conversation.
No, it's timely,
because when I first
started doing the work that
I was doing in helping people
and coaching them,
I realized actually,
I could spend a
lot of time helping
other people through
the things I'd mastered.
And I never called
myself a master.
I always said, as
Bruce Lee said,
I think we're all
student masters.
We're all training in mastery.
And that also means
that anybody is capable,
you know, of developing
mastery in their lives.
And my goal became that.
It became, how do
I help other people
to become their own masters?
Not to seek a master, but
to become their own master.
And each of us are on a
unique journey, each of us
have got unique
challenges in our lives,
and there's a
unique path that we
have to master in order for
us to fulfill our purpose
and for our gifts to make
a difference in the world.
So our challenge
in life is really,
how do we achieve mastery
over our own purpose
and our own fulfillment
of that purpose.
And that's-- that is the
biggest challenge of all.
Rather than running around
chasing after other people
who've only got half the
answer or part of the answer,
the only person who's got
all of the answer is you.
Now, in order to get to a place
where you begin to have mastery
over your own journey,
over your own path,
and when you act as your own
advisor, and you get to a point
where you don't borrow wisdom
any more from other people,
but you actually start to
get to generate your own,
that's probably the
most critical task
you've got to do
in terms of being
in a state your own mastery.
Now, some of you,
some of your viewers
may have heard the phrase,
that if you give a man a fish,
he gets to eat for a day, if you
give a man the ability to fish,
he can feed himself
and his family
for the rest of his life.
And I took that
particular phrase
and I changed it a
little bit for the sake
of mastery and wisdom.
And I said, you give
a person a wisdom
and he'll become
wise about one thing.
If you give a person the ability
to generate their own wisdom,
then they'll become
wise about everything.
However, if you give
a person the ability
to help others generate wisdom,
then he can help everybody
around himself become wise.
But the biggest talent of
all is actually giving a man
the ability to
help others to help
others generate their wisdom.
It's kind of one or
two steps removed.
Now, when you have the ability
to help others to generate
their own wisdom
between themselves,
it means that the whole
world becomes wise.
So mastery really
isn't just about you.
It isn't even
about other people.
It's about the wisdom itself.
It's about the
lessons themselves
and making sure that
they're getting learned,
whether it's you
that's learning them,
there's other people
or whether they're being
learned in order to make
a difference to the world.
It's never about you.
It's never about other people.
When I was learning
martial arts,
I learned a really
important lesson.
I used to tell the students
that I used to train
in tai chi and qi gong.
And I said, look, if you get
to be so much better than me
that you actually get to
improve the discipline
itself in the process, then
you're exercising mastery.
It doesn't mean you've
become a master,
but at least you're exercising
the practice of mastery,
because you improve
the discipline itself.
In the East, often a master is
classified as a master when not
they've mastered a particular
kick or a particular punch
and they've reached so many
levels of belt or something
like that.
No.
A master is typically
classified as a master
when they've added something
new to the discipline.
A brand new kick, a
faster punch, or a new way
of gathering energy or a new
meditation which everybody, all
the other masters start to use.
So mastery is often
considered only
to be mastery when you've done
something which has contributed
excellence beyond yourself
to the discipline itself,
to the mastery that everybody
else can actually join in on.
So real mastery isn't about you.
It isn't about the people.
It's about something
more eternal
that everybody can
continue to learn from,
even when you're not around.
So it's like the chi,
the force, the life force
being able to express
itself through us.
That's what it's really about?
-Yeah.
If you can add to the life
force so it changes its nature
and it improves the vitality
and life and consciousness
of all things, even
when you're not there,
then that's an
example of mastery.
I the East, one of the
ways to classify masters
is, interestingly, through
ability to work with control
and to work also
with collaboration.
It's like yin and
yang, male and female.
A master is someone
who knows exactly
when to take control and, if
you like, manipulate things.
He also knows exactly when
to let go and collaborate
and go with the
flow with things.
And the best
masters are the ones
not necessarily who do
one at a certain time,
another at another time.
They in a moment what
proportion of each they need.
They know they need a
certain amount of control
and then a certain
amount of collaboration,
and when they get
that just right,
they end up in a
state of harmony.
Many of you may
have seen the tai
chi symbol, which is dark
one side and light the other.
It's got a couple
of dots in there,
and there's this S-shaped kind
of dividing line between them.
But actually, that line
isn't a dividing line.
It's actually a harmony line.
It's the place where the
dark and the light, the male
and the, female the
yin and the yang,
are actually in proportion
with each other.
They're in harmony
They often call that
the-- the whole symbol
is called the tai chi itself.
That yin-yang symbol
is called the tai chi.
And that dividing line, like I
said, it's not a dividing line.
It's a harmony line, and they
call that the tai chi line.
Now, when you walk in life
along the tai chi line,
it means everything's
proportion in your life.
Everything's in harmony.
You're literally walking the
middle road, as they say,
in Buddhism.
So--
The point zero.
Yeah, that point is where
there is no-- it's equality,
if you like.
Actually, it's
not even equality.
It's a place where--
Harmony.
There is zero conflict.
So when you say
that zero point, it
refers to a place of stillness.
It's a place where
there's possibility
of things coming into creation.
When you're in that state
of harmony and you're
in a perfect proportion--
not equality.
No, it's proportion.
One thing could be
bigger than the other.
When you're in a place of
proportion within yourself
and you're in that
place of stillness
and your consciousness is placed
on that kind of zero point
in your being, that's when
you connect to your source,
deep down inside of yourself.
That's when, if you place
an intention into the world,
into yourself at that
point at that time,
because you're
connected to your source
without any interference, that
intention will materialize.
It'll come out into the world.
So real mastery is
actually about that.
It's about being in a place
within yourself where you are
exercising control and
collaboration in proportion
with one another, and you are
also aligned to your source
at the time.
Let me just finish
with one point
on this, which is the research
I found out recently that I've
been doing, I just discovered
yesterday something
amazing and new amongst
the data for the people
that we were actually
working with.
We discovered that when someone
is aligned to who they truly
are deep down within themselves,
that means this person they're
showing the world is the same
one as who they really are deep
down inside, authentically.
When they get to that
kind of alignment,
synchronicities and
coincidences start to happen
for that person in their life.
And we also realized, though,
that there was another thing
that would generate
synchronicities
and coincidences,
which was their ability
to be completely
present and centered
and still in the moment.
Now, when they weren't
being bothered by their past
and they weren't being
distracted by their future
and they were able to be
completely with their attention
and intention in the
moment, in the here and now,
if they could do that, it turned
out the more time they were
able to be in that
kind of state,
the more likelihood
they were going
to get synchronicities and
coincidences in their lives.
And the most amazing thing
was when people did both.
When a person was aligned to
who they truly were deep down
inside of themselves and they
were able to do that here
in the present and
hold that alignment,
that's when the
biggest synchronicities
and coincidences and magic start
to happen in people's lives.
Va-va-voom.
So that, for me,
is real mastery.
If you can be aligned
to your true self
and you can hold
that in the moment,
in a state of pure presence,
in the here and now,
you get kind of thing that
happens in physics, which
is whenever energy gathers in
a particular area in space,
physics says it acquires
a gravitational field,
an attractive field.
The more energy there is,
the more gravity there is.
So small planets don't have
as much pull as big planets
or as stars do, for example.
Now, the same thing
happens with you.
When all your energy
is here in the moment
and it isn't spread out
thinly over time and space
in the past and future,
if all your energy's here,
then you're going to
have a very strong
gravitational field around
you-- a strong attractive field
around you.
In fact, people who are
in the present literally
have more presence.
You're more in the present,
you're going to have
more presence, all right?
And it shows, because
those people are often
described as individuals
have a lot of weight
to their character.
They literally have a lot of
gravitas to their character.
And that means that
they are people
with incredible influence
in their environment.
And charisma.
That's often how
it comes across.
If they were in alignment
with their true self
and are being able to hold that
in that moment in the presence
of themselves to the biggest
strength that they can,
that often radiates as charisma.
People don't know what it is
they like about that person.
They just seem to be drawn
to them, gravitationally
attracted to them.
They literally
gravitate towards them.
That's what happens.
So mastery really does come
down to just those two things.
It's about alignment
and it's about presence.
Anybody you ever met who
has a presence to them
and is clearly aligned
in some kind of way
to who they really are, to their
values, they demonstrate two
really important qualities.
The first thing is
they seem to have
a kind of grace about them.
Everything they do
seems effortless,
and it seems almost beautiful.
It's like a dance.
It's something that you watch.
And it's not something
that visually is beautiful,
but it's kinesthetically
beautiful.
You feel it on the inside
that who this person is
and the way they're
doing things,
there's something just
beautiful about them.
And it's interesting
how these people
physically might not be that
appealing to a lot of others.
However, the connection
that they have,
the gravitas that they have,
whatever they're radiating
is something that other
people feel the grace of,
and they just feel compelled to
think that individual is being
beautiful, even though
they physically might
not be particularly attractive.
So there are lots of saints
and gurus who are like that.
Physically they don't look
like much on the surface,
but somehow in their
presence, you feel grace.
And grace, when you
sustain it for long enough,
people often regard someone
who's gracious, that's a kind
of prerequisite for beauty.
If you can demonstrate
grace consistently
and in a repeatable
way, people will
often regard you as
a beautiful being--
a beautiful human being.
So mastery is also
to do with grace.
You can be aligned.
You can be in the
present moment.
However, if you do those two
things, being present and being
aligned in a way
which is graceful,
people will experience
your beauty.
And most masters,
they radiate that kind
of grace, that kind of beauty.
And then-- it's one of my
ambitions, if you like.
I'd like to get to a point where
I'm aligned and fully present
and I'm doing
everything with grace
and I'm not tripping over myself
and getting in my own way.
I'd love to get to
that point, so it's--
Well, you're certain
passionate, that's for sure.
I'm so enjoying
this conversation
and I know that you are, too.
This has-- this has
been incredible.
So the two traits you said,
the last two traits, I've
heard grace and beauty
is the second one,
are you-- is there-- OK.
So if you stay in alignment
and you're fully the present
and you manage those two things
in a way which is graceful
and you sustain that
graceful way of being,
eventually, over
time, you become
someone who radiates beauty.
So the two are--
of course they are.
Oh my goodness.
And it feels good, it
makes us feel good anyway.
There's, like, no
words are needed, and--
People always get uplifted
by beauty, but especially
beauty which is to do with
presence and to do with grace
and to do with kind of character
which has integrity to it.
You always feel
uplifted when you're
around someone like that.
And you always tend to
be pretty depressed when
your around someone who's
constantly undermining
themselves and clumsy and
just not there and their mind
is distracted and
somewhere else.
Energetically, you feel
frustrated by someone
like that.
You don't want to
be around them.
You want to move away from them.
You're actually repulsed
from an individual like that
rather than attracted, right?
So it kind of
follows that someone
who can be aligned and be
present and be graceful
is going to show a beauty
which isn't visual.
It's something you feel
and something you know.
And as a consequence,
it's easy to trust.
Dolphins, let me tell
you, dolphins have that.
They do, don't they?
Graceful-- they're graceful.
Look how they swim,
look how they leap,
and look how every movement
they have is perfectly aligned
to what they're trying to do.
So they have that alignment.
They have that presence.
They can be totally there.
You put yourself in the
water, they're there for you.
They're all--
they're all over you
with their energy and their
attention, aren't they?
And obviously, they
can sustain that, too.
They don't have any
problem in sustaining it.
So it's inevitable that human
beings would look at creatures
like dolphins and can't help
but immediately experience them
as a source of beauty.
Because they've got
all those qualities.
They're aligned, they're
sustaining their grace,
they're totally present.
Of course they'd be beautiful.
It's even beyond beauty.
It's that unlimited
potential, it's the love,
it's the presence, it's the
all time-- it's no more time,
linear time, it's all of it.
It's our spirit that experience
through those moments, I think.
Beauty is linked
to that, obviously.
Well, there is one step beyond
beauty, which is when you've
been able to maintain
beauty and you've
been able to do it in a way
which seems like it's going
to last forever, then
it becomes precious
to not just immediate
people, but it
becomes universally precious.
That's the point when people
usually consider that,
whatever it is, to be sacred.
So beauty, when it's been
eternally established,
is something that
people eventually
regard as being sacred.
So masters, true masters who are
aligned and are present and are
exercising grace and
are radiating beauty
and have been doing
it for a long time,
or even their teaching
or the learning around
them has been around
for a long time,
eventually that person,
or their teachings
or their way of being, is
considered to be sacred.
And everybody has a
reverence for them.
So resonance with that
individual over time
becomes reverence.
Because now that
individual has moved on
from simply being
human to actually
being someone or an entity
or a way of-- a being
which is actually sacred.
It's simply an evolution
from resonance to reverence.
And usually you find
the people who've
got the greatest reverence
for those kind of people
are the people themselves.
They have a deep send souls
revering their own gift.
Now, it's not an
egotistical way.
It's something which they honor.
They totally respect the
gift that they've been given,
and they don't abuse it.
And they usually look at it
and work with it in a way
where they treat it as sacred.
And I've come
across some people,
teachers and the holders
of knowledge, if you like.
And there are some people who
work with their knowledge,
but they don't
treat it as sacred.
They don't understand the
power it has to bring beauty
into the world
and uplift people,
and they treat it in a
very casual kind of way.
And somehow, they're
not anywhere nears
as inspiring as someone
who is totally working
with their knowledge
and their teachings
in a way where what they
consider that working with
is sacred.
Don't disrespect it.
And you don't.
With someone like that, you do
not disrespect that knowledge.
You don't disrespect that
way of being because one
of the consequences usually is
immediately, within yourself,
you feel like hell.
You feel, oh my god,
why'd I do that?
I can't believe I did that.
And you're totally
embarrassed and so on.
But the masters, usually, they
tend to be quite nice to you,
because they're compassionate.
It's a central feature
of being a master.
It goes back to
what I said earlier.
Compassion is really about
working with the truth in a way
which gives you more life.
So I think mastery, if it's not
something which is bringing you
to the truth in a way
which gives you more life,
it's probably not mastery.
It's something else,
but it's not mastery.
And it's, I think, the
reason why the Tibetans look
at compassion as
being the greatest
force there is in the universe.
Often if you speak
to Tibetans and ask
them, what do you think
the most powerful force is
in the universe, they
won't say the USA.
Right?
No.
What they'll say is, compassion.
Because compassion
can help people
bring themselves to
the truth in a way
where they become more alive.
And if there's more
life in the universe
and there's more truth,
then surely we're
heading in the right direction.
Well, thank you so much, Jazz.
Thank you for this
amazing conversation.
I'm sure you have
enjoyed it too.
We want more.
I know, I know.
I want more.
We have to bring
you to the studio
down in the Gaiam TV for more.
My goodness, this was great.
Thank you so much.
See you soon?
Yeah, thank you, Lilou.
And it's a real privilege
to have had your audience
and for you to have invited all
of this awareness out of me.
Beautiful.
Well, thank you so much.
Much love, my
beautiful co-creators.
Bye.